## Business To Customer (B2C)

/mpesa/b2c/v3/paymentrequest

Request Body
{
  "OriginatorConversationID": "600997_Test_32et3241ed8yu",
  "InitiatorName": "testapi",
  "SecurityCredential": "RC6E9WDxXR4b9X2c6z3gp0oC5Th ==",
  "CommandID": "BusinessPayment",
  "Amount": "10",
  "PartyA": "600992",
  "PartyB": "254705912645",
  "Remarks": "remarked",
  "QueueTimeOutURL": "https://mydomain.com/path",
  "ResultURL": "https://mydomain.com/path",
  "Occassion": "ChristmasPay"
}
Request Parameter Definition
Name	Description	Type	Optional	Sample Value
OriginatorConversationID	Unique string generated by the merchant system for every B2C request to avoid double disbursement. You can use this ID to query the status of a transaction before making another disbursement.	String	No	600997*Test*32et3241ed8yu
InitiatorName	Username of the API user created on the M-PESA portal.	String	No	johndoe
SecurityCredential	Encrypted password of the API user created on the M-PESA portal.	String	No	RC6E9WDx9X2c6z3gp0oC5Th==
CommandID	Transaction type used to identify the B2C transaction: - **_SalaryPayment***: Supports sending money to both registered and unregistered M-PESA customers (sending to unregistered numbers is no longer supported). - _BusinessPayment*: Normal business to customer payment, supports only M-PESA registered customers. - **PromotionPayment**: Promotional payment to customers. The M-PESA notification message is a congratulatory message. Supports only M-PESA registered customers.	String	No	BusinessPayment
Amount	Transaction amount.	Numeric	No	11
PartyA	B2C organization short code from which the money is sent.	Numeric	No	600997
PartyB	Customer’s mobile number to receive the money (12-digit MSISDN without the plus sign, e.g. 254705912645).	Numeric	No	254705912645
Remarks	Additional information sent with the request (2–100 characters).	String	No	Any string between 2 and 100 chars
QueueTimeOutURL	URL for notification if the payment request times out while awaiting processing.	URL	No	https://mydomain.com/b2c/timedout
ResultURL	URL where the payment gateway sends the result after processing the payment request.	URL	No	https://mydomain.com/b2c/result
Occassion	Additional information sent with the request (1–100 characters).	String	Yes	Any string between 1 and 100 chars
Response Body
{
  "ConversationID": "AG_20240706_20106e9209f64bebd05b",
  "OriginatorConversationID": "600997_Test_32et3241ed8yu",
  "ResponseCode": "0",
  "ResponseDescription": "Accept the service request successfully."
}
Response Parameter Definition
Name	Description	Parameter Type	Sample Value
OriginatorConversationID	The unique request ID for tracking a transaction	Alpha-Numeric	Alpha-Numeric String of less than 20 characters e.g.: 1236-7134259-1
ConversationID	The unique request ID returned my M-PESA for each request made	Alpha-Numeric	Alpha Numeric String of less than 20 characters e.g.: AG_20210709_1234409f86436c583e3f
ResponseCode	The numeric status code indicates the status transaction processing. 0 means success and any other code means an error occurred or the transaction failed.	Number	0 or 1 or 2001 or 21
ResponseDescription	Response description message	String	Accept the service request successfully
Callback payload After processing the B2C transaction on M-PESA, you get feedback via the ResultURL which you need to have specified beforehand in the B2C request.

{
  "Result": {
    "ResultType": 0,
    "ResultCode": 0,
    "ResultDesc": "The service request is processed successfully.",
    "OriginatorConversationID": "53e3-4aa8-9fe0-8fb5e4092cdd3533373",
    "ConversationID": "AG_20240706_2010364430d9bbdaf872",
    "TransactionID": "SG632NMUAB",
    "ResultParameters": {
      "ResultParameter": [
        {
          "Key": "TransactionAmount",
          "Value": 10
        },
        {
          "Key": "TransactionReceipt",
          "Value": "SG632NMUAB"
        },
        {
          "Key": "ReceiverPartyPublicName",
          "Value": "254705912645 - NICHOLAS JOHN SONGOK"
        },
        {
          "Key": "TransactionCompletedDateTime",
          "Value": "06.07.2024 22:48:52"
        },
        {
          "Key": "B2CUtilityAccountAvailableFunds",
          "Value": 8959269.6
        },
        {
          "Key": "B2CWorkingAccountAvailableFunds",
          "Value": 1199371.0
        },
        {
          "Key": "B2CRecipientIsRegisteredCustomer",
          "Value": "Y"
        },
        {
          "Key": "B2CChargesPaidAccountAvailableFunds",
          "Value": -1980.0
        }
      ]
    },
    "ReferenceData": {
      "ReferenceItem": {
        "Key": "QueueTimeoutURL",
        "Value": "https://internalsandbox.safaricom.co.ke/mpesa/b2cresults/v1/submit"
      }
    }
  }
}
Sample Unsuccessful Callback Payload

{
  "Result": {
    "ResultType": 0,
    "ResultCode": 2001,
    "ResultDesc": "The initiator information is invalid.",
    "OriginatorConversationID": "53e3-4aa8-9fe0-8fb5e4092cdd3544366",
    "ConversationID": "AG_20240707_201062f6f6f5804f7a33",
    "TransactionID": "SG722NMVXQ",
    "ReferenceData": {
      "ReferenceItem": {
        "Key": "QueueTimeoutURL",
        "Value": "https://internalsandbox.safaricom.co.ke/mpesa/b2cresults/v1/submit"
      }
    }
  }
}
Results Parameter Definition

The following parameters are returned in the callback payload, whether the request was successful or not:

Parameter	Description	Type	Optional	Sample Value
Result	Root object for the entire result message.	JSON Object	No	{ ... }
ResultType	Status code indicating if the transaction was sent to your listener. Usually 0.	Numeric	No	0
ResultCode	Status code for transaction processing. 0 means success; any other code means failure.	String	No	0
ResultDesc	Message describing the status of request processing.	String	No	The service request is processed successfully. The initiator information is invalid.
OriginatorConversationID	Unique identifier for the transaction request, returned by the API proxy.	String	No	53e3-4aa8-9fe0-8fb5e4092cdd3544366
ConversationID	Unique identifier for the transaction request, returned by M-PESA.	String	No	AG_20240707_20106f7a33
TransactionID	Unique M-PESA transaction ID for each payment request. Also sent to customer via SMS.	String	No	SG722NMVXQ`
Additional parameters are returned for a successful request, under ResultParameters:

Parameter	Description	Type	Optional	Sample Value
ResultParameters	Object holding more transaction details.	JSON Object	Yes	{ "ResultParameters": { ... } }
ResultParameter	Array within ResultParameters holding additional transaction details as objects.	JSON Array	Yes	[ { ... }, ... ]
TransactionAmount	Amount transacted. Also returned under ResultParameter.	Numeric	Yes	10
TransactionReceipt	Unique M-PESA transaction ID for the payment request.	String	Yes	SG722NMVXQ
ReceiverPartyPublicName	Name and phone number of the customer who received the payment.	String	Yes	254705912645 - NICHOLAS JOHN SONGOK
TransactionCompletedDateTime	Date and time the transaction completed on M-PESA.	String	Yes	06.07.2024 22:48:52
B2CUtilityAccountAvailableFunds	Available balance of the Utility account under the B2C shortcode used.	Decimal	Yes	8959269.60
B2CWorkingAccountAvailableFunds	Available balance of the Working account under the B2C shortcode used.	Decimal	Yes	1199371.00
B2CRecipientIsRegisteredCustomer	Indicates if the customer is a registered M-PESA customer.	Character	Yes	"Y" for Yes, "N" for No
B2CChargesPaidAccountAvailableFunds	Available balance of the Charges Paid account under the B2C shortcode used.	Decimal	Yes	-1980.00
Reference data parameters:

Parameter	Description	Type	Optional	Sample Value
ReferenceData	Object holding additional details for the request.	JSON Object	Yes	{ "ReferenceData": { ... } }
ReferenceItem	Object within ReferenceData holding more transaction details.	JSON Object	Yes	{ "ReferenceItem": { ... } }
Sample Error Response
{
  "requestId": "1c5b-4ba8-815c-ac45c57a3db01469899",
  "errorCode": "500.002.1001",
  "errorMessage": "Duplicate OriginatorConversationID."
}
Name	Description	Sample	Type
requestId	Unique identifier assigned by API gateway.	30764-19833054-1	String
errorCode	Unique error code.	401.001	String
errorMessage	A descriptive message of failure.	Bad Request - Invalid amount	String
Response Codes
Response Code	Response Description
0	Success
Result Codes
ResultCode	ResultDesc	Explanation
0	The service request is processed successfully.	The B2C transaction has been processed successfully on M-PESA.
1	The balance is insufficient for the transaction.	The B2C account does not have enough money in its utility account to complete the transaction requested.
2	Declined due to limit rule	The amount provided in the request is smaller than the allowed B2C transaction amount.
3	Declined due to limit rule: greater than the maximum transaction amount.	The amount provided in the request is greater than the allowed B2C transaction amount.
4	Declined due to limit rule: would exceed daily transfer limit	For the business organization, the daily transfer limit is very high; this rule is more likely to apply to the customer, where the customer daily transfer amount limit is currently Ksh 500,000.
8	Declined due to limit rule: would exceed the maximum balance.	Continuing to process the requested transaction would exceed the maximum customer account balance limit (currently Ksh 500,000).
11	The DebitParty is in an invalid state.	The B2C account is not active.
21	The initiator is not allowed to initiate this request	The API user used in the request has no ORG B2C API initiator role required to successfully initiate B2C request.
2001	The initiator information is invalid.	The API user credentials provided in the request are invalid. This can be: - Wrong API user username. - Wrong API user password encrypted. - Wrong algorithm or certificate used for API user password encryption.
2006	Declined due to account rule: The account status does not allow this transaction.	The B2C account is not active.
2028	The request is not permitted according to product assignment.	The PartyA short code specified in the request has no permission to perform B2C payments.
2040	Credit Party customer type (Unregistered or Registered Customer) can't be supported by the service.	The customer is not registered.
8006	The security credential is locked	Indicates that the password for the API user is locked. The Business Administrator can unlock it.
SFC_IC0003	The operator does not exist.	The phone number provided in the request is invalid or does not exist on M-PESA.

## Account Balance
Enquire the balance on an M-Pesa BuyGoods (Till Number)

/mpesa/accountbalance/v1/query

Request Body
{
  "Initiator": "testapiuser",
  "SecurityCredential": "SAFVNChNHfVtXEZMBuVo+a1Hwr+DtrUVN3zVg==",
  "CommandID": "AccountBalance",
  "PartyA": "600000",
  "IdentifierType": "4",
  "Remarks": "ok",
  "QueueTimeOutURL": "http://myservice:8080/queuetimeouturl",
  "ResultURL": "http://myservice:8080/result"
}
Request Parameter Definition
Name	Description	Type	Sample Values
CommandID	A unique command is passed to the M-PESA system. Max length is 64.	String	AccountBalance
PartyA	The shortcode of the organization querying for the account balance.	Numeric	600772
IdentifierType	Type of organization querying for the account balance.	Numeric	4
Remarks	Comments that are sent along with the transaction	String	tests
Initiator	API user’s credential/username used to authenticate the transaction request	Alpha-Numeric	Testapi772
SecurityCredential	Initiator password is encrypted to give the security credentials.	String	EToK4lNR...
QueueTimeoutURL	The end-point that receives a notification in case of a timeout.	URL	https://ip:port/path or domain:port/path
ResultURL	Destination URL which Daraja should send the result notification to.	URL	https://ip:port/path or domain:port/path
Response Body
{
  "OriginatorConversationID": "515-5258779-3",
  "ConversationID": "AG_20200123_0000417fed8ed666e976",
  "ResponseCode": "0",
  "ResponseDescription": "Accept the service request successfully"
}
Response Parameter Definition
Name	Description	Type	Sample Values
OriginatorConversationID	Unique identifier of the request message. Auto-generated by M-PESA for a third party/Organization.	String	515-5258779-3
ConversationID	Unique identifier generated by M-Pesa for a previous request message.	String	AG_20200123_0000417fed8ed666e976
ResponseCode	Indicates whether Mobile Money accepts the request or not.	String	0
ResponseDescription	Description of the parameter Response Code.	String	Accept the service request successfully
Response Error Codes
errorCode	errorMessage	Mitigation	HTTP code
401.002.01	Error Occurred - Invalid Access Token - XXX	Regenerate a new access token and use it before one hour expiry period. Ensure you’re using the correct credentials.	401
400.002.02	Bad Request – Invalid XXXX.	Ensure the request payload is set as per API documentation.	400
404.002.01	Resource not found	Make sure you are calling the correct API endpoint.	404
405.001	XXX Method Not Allowed	Ensure you’re passing B2C request as POST. Any other method will be rejected.	405
500.002.1001	Duplicate OriginatorConversationID	Ensure the OriginatorConversationID being passed is unique for every request.	500
500.003.1001	Internal Server Error	Make sure everything on your side is correctly set up and your server is running as expected.	500
500.003.02	Error Occurred: Spike Arrest Violation	This means you’re sending multiple requests that violate API transaction per second limit set. Ensure your application/system is working correctly and not sending multiple requests.	500
500.003.03	Quota Violation	Sending multiple requests that violate API requests limit set. Ensure your application/system is working correctly and not sending multiple requests.	500
Callback Result Payload
After processing the reversal request on M-PESA, you get feedback via the ResultURL which you need to have specified beforehand in the Reversal request.

Result body
{
  "Result": {
    "ResultType": "0",
    "ResultCode": "0",
    "ResultDesc": "The service request is processed successfully",
    "OriginatorConversationID": "16917-22577599-3",
    "ConversationID": "AG_20200206_00005e091a8ec6b9eac5",
    "TransactionID": "OA90000000",
    "ResultParameters": {
      "ResultParameter": [
        {
          "Key": "AccountBalance",
          "Value": "Working Account|KES|700000.00|700000.00|0.00|0.00&Float Account|KES|0.00|0.00|0.00|0.00&Utility Account|KES|228037.00|228037.00|0.00|0.00&Charges Paid Account|KES|-1540.00|-1540.00|0.00|0.00&Organization Settlement Account|KES|0.00|0.00|0.00|0.00"
        },
        {
          "Key": "BOCompletedTime",
          "Value": "20200109125710"
        }
      ]
    },
    "ReferenceData": {
      "ReferenceItem": {
        "Key": "QueueTimeoutURL",
        "Value": "https://internalsandbox.safaricom.co.ke/mpesa/abresults/v1/submit"
      }
    }
  }
}
Result Body Parameter Definition
Name	Description	Type	Sample Values
Result Type	0: completed 1: waiting for further messages	Integer	0
Result Code	It indicates whether Mobile Money processes the request successfully or not. Max length is 10	String	0
OriginatorConversationID	The unique identifier of the request message. This is auto-generated by M-PESA for third-party/Organisations. Its value comes from the response message. It can be used to check the status of the transaction.	String	16917-22577599-3
ConversationID	The unique identifier generated by M-Pesa for a request.	String	AG_20200206_00005e091a8ec6b9eac5
TransactionID	It’s only for transactions. When the request is a transaction request, M-Pesa will generate a unique identifier for the transaction.	String	OA90000000
ResultParameters	It is used to carry specific parameters for the account balance query. For each account, the fields are presented in the following order and separated by vertical bars (|): Format: |||<Available Balance>||		
Key	It indicates a parameter name.	String	
Value	It indicates a parameter value.	String	
Working Account Available Funds	Mmf account available balance.	Decimal	Working Account|KES|700000.00
Working Account: Uncleared Funds	Mmf account uncleared balance.	Decimal	700000.00|
Working Account Reserved Funds	A charge paid account reserved balance.	Decimal	0.00|
Charges Paid Account Available Funds	A charge paid account available balance.	Decimal	Charges Paid Account|KES|-1540.00
Charges Paid Account Uncleared Funds	A charge paid account uncleared balance.	Decimal	1540.00|
Charges Paid Account Reserved Funds	A charge paid account reserved balance.	Decimal	0.00|
Utility Account Available Funds	Utility account available balance.	Decimal	Utility Account|KES|228037.00
Utility Account Uncleared Funds	Utility account uncleared balance.	Decimal	228037.00|
Reference Item	It is used to carry some reference data that M-Pesa need not analyze but needs to record in the transaction log.	ParameterType[1..unbounded]	
ReferenceData	Utility account uncleared balance. It is used to carry some reference data that M-Pesa need not analyze but needs to record in the transactions log.	ReferenceData	
Error Codes
Error Code	Description	Message Type	Details
15	Duplicate Detected	ApiResult	Currently, any requests which present an originator conversation id that has been seen before will be rejected. This rule will need to be reconsidered in contexts that require multi-stage conversations or multiple callers. This check (along with the message expiry check) is the first thing done by the transaction processor when handling an API request. The outcome is reported in the ApiResult message.
17	Internal Failure	ApiResult	A catch-all for failures that are not identified more specifically – this can occur in either the ApiResponse or ApiResult – although the intent is to replace any such error with a more precise message.
18	Initiator Credential Check Failure	ApiResult	The password check for the initiator failed, either because the presented password is wrong, or something has gone wrong in the encryption or decryption steps. This is issued in the ApiResult before the creation of a financial transaction.
19	Message Sequencing Failure	ApiResult	
20	Unresolved Initiator	ApiResult	The initiator username presented with the request cannot be found. This is included in the ApiResult.
21	Initiator to Primary Party Permission Failure	ApiResult	The initiator presented does not have the right to issue requests for the specified primary party (as established during creation of the initiator on the admin web site). The is part of the ApiResult, and computed prior to issuing a financial transaction.
22	Initiator to Receiver Party Permission Failure	ApiResult	The presented initiator username can be received, but the initiator is not currently active. This fact is returned in the ApiResult.
24	Missing mandatory fields	ApiResponse	Required input parameters are defined for each type of API operation. If these are missing, then this is issued in the ApiResult message. The names of the missing parameters are included in the result parameters field.
25	InvalidRequestParameters	ApiResponse	If all required parameters are presented, then validation checks are performed. Specifically, the parameter is checked to see if it can be converted to the intended type. Failures are indicated in the ApiResult message, with the details included in the result parameters.
26	Traffic blocking condition in place	ApiResponse	SystemTooBusy: Included in the ApiResponse message if a traffic blocking condition is in place.
29	InvalidCommand	ApiResponse	The command specified in the request is not defined – this is part of the ApiResult.
100000000	Request was cached, waiting for resending	ApiResponse	
100000001	The system is overload	ApiResponse	
100000002	Throttling error	ApiResponse	
100000004	Internal Server Error	ApiResponse	
100000005	Invalid input value:%1; %1 indicates the parameter’s name.	ApiResponse	
100000007	Service’s status is abnormal.	ApiResponse	
100000009	API’s status is abnormal	ApiResponse	
100000010	Insufficient permissions	ApiResponse	
100000011	Exceed the limitation of request rate	ApiResponse	
00.002.1001	Service is currently under maintenance. Please try again later


## Reversals

/mpesa/reversal/v1/request

Use Cases
Reverse an erroneous payment made to your M-PESA Collection Account (Pay bill or Till number)
Reverse double payments
Reverse payments where services were not fulfilled
Request Body
{
  "Initiator": "apiop37",
  "SecurityCredential": "jUb+dOXJiBDui8FnruaFckZJQup3kmmCH5XJ4NY/Oo3KaUTmJbxUiVgzBjqdL533u5Q435MT2VJwr/ /1fuZvA===",
  "CommandID": "TransactionReversal",
  "TransactionID": "PDU91HIVIT",
  "Amount": "200",
  "ReceiverParty": "603021",
  "RecieverIdentifierType": "11",
  "ResultURL": "https://mydomain.com/reversal/result",
  "QueueTimeOutURL": "https://mydomain.com/reversal/queue",
  "Remarks": "Payment reversal"
}
Request Parameter Definition
Parameter	Description	Type	Required	Sample Value
Initiator	Username of the API user created on M-PESA portal	String	Yes	johndoe
SecurityCredential	Encrypted password for the API user	String	Yes	RC6E9WDx9X2c6z3gp0oC5Th ==
CommandID	Only 'TransactionReversal' is allowed	String	Yes	TransactionReversal
Amount	Transaction amount	Numeric	Yes	100
ReceiverParty	Organization Short Code	Numeric	Yes	600997
RecieverIdentifierType	Type of Organization (should be '11')	Numeric	Yes	11
Remarks	Additional information (2-100 characters)	String	Yes	Any string
QueueTimeOutURL	URL for timeout notification	URL	Yes	https://mydomain.com/reversal/timedout
ResultURL	URL for result notification	URL	Yes	https://mydomain.com/reversal/result
TransactionID	M-PESA Receipt Number for the transaction being reversed	String	Yes	PDU91HIVIT
Response Body
Success Response
{
  "OriginatorConversationID": "f1e2-4b95-a71d-b30d3cdbb7a7735297",
  "ConversationID": "AG_20210706_20106e9209f64bebd05b",
  "ResponseCode": "0",
  "ResponseDescription": "Accept the service request successfully."
}
Response Parameter Definition
Parameter	Description	Sample Value	Type
ConversationID	Unique global identifier for the transaction request	4f31-fd2d5deb744c	String
OriginatorConversationID	Unique identifier for the transaction request from M-PESA	AG_20210706_2010ead4245	String
ResponseCode	Status code (0 = success, others = error)	0	Numeric
ResponseDescription	Acknowledgment message	Accept the service request successfully	String
Callback Result Payload
After processing, feedback is sent to your specified ResultURL.

Successful Callback
{
  "Result": {
    "ResultType": 0,
    "ResultCode": 0,
    "ResultDesc": "The service request is processed successfully.",
    "OriginatorConversationID": "dad6-4c34-8787-c8cb963a496d1268232",
    "ConversationID": "AG_20211114_201018edbbf9f1582eaa",
    "TransactionID": "SKE52PAWR9",
    "ResultParameters": {
      "ResultParameter": [
        {
          "Key": "DebitAccountBalance",
          "Value": "Utility Account|KES|7722179.62|7722179.62|0.00|0.00"
        },
        { "Key": "Amount", "Value": 1.0 },
        { "Key": "TransCompletedTime", "Value": 20211114132711 },
        { "Key": "OriginalTransactionID", "Value": "SKC82PACB8" },
        { "Key": "Charge", "Value": 0.0 },
        {
          "Key": "CreditPartyPublicName",
          "Value": "254705912645 - NICHOLAS JOHN SONGOK"
        },
        {
          "Key": "DebitPartyPublicName",
          "Value": "600992 - Safaricom Daraja 992"
        }
      ]
    },
    "ReferenceData": {
      "ReferenceItem": {
        "Key": "QueueTimeoutURL",
        "Value": "https://internalsandbox.safaricom.co.ke/mpesa/reversalresults/v1/submit"
      }
    }
  }
}
Unsuccessful Callback
{
  "Result": {
    "ResultType": 0,
    "ResultCode": "R000002",
    "ResultDesc": "The OriginalTransactionID is invalid.",
    "OriginatorConversationID": "3124-481d-b706-10bdd6fbc8e21792398",
    "ConversationID": "AG_20211114_2010573069aefb6b625a",
    "TransactionID": "SKE0000000",
    "ReferenceData": {
      "ReferenceItem": {
        "Key": "QueueTimeoutURL",
        "Value": "https://internalsandbox.safaricom.co.ke/mpesa/reversalresults/v1/submit"
      }
    }
  }
}
Response Parameter Definition
Parameter	Description	Type	Optional	Sample Value
Result	Root parameter for the result message	JSON Object	No	{}
ResultType	Status code (usually 0)	Numeric	No	0
ResultCode	Status code (0 = success, others = failure)	String	No	0
ResultDesc	Status message	String	No	The service request is processed successfully.
OriginatorConversationID	Unique identifier for the reversal request	String	No	53e3-4aa8-9fe0-8fb5e4092cdd3544366
ConversationID	Unique identifier from M-PESA	String	No	AG_20210707_20106f7a33
TransactionID	M-PESA Receipt Number for the reversal request	String	No	SKE52PAWR9
ResultParameters	Additional transaction details	JSON Object	Yes	{}
DebitAccountBalance	Account balances (format: Account Type|Currency|...)	String	Yes	Utility Account|KES|7722179.62
Amount	Transaction amount	Decimal	Yes	1.00
TransCompletedTime	Completion time (YYYYMMDDhhmmss)	String	Yes	20211114132711
OriginalTransactionID	TransactionID of the transaction to be reversed	String	Yes	SKC82PACB8
Charge	Total fee amount	String	Yes	0.00
CreditPartyPublicName	Credit Party public name	String	Yes	254705912645 - NICHOLAS JOHN SONGOK
DebitPartyPublicName	Debit Party public name	String	Yes	600992 - Safaricom Daraja 992
ReferenceData	Additional request details	JSON Object	Yes	{}
Result Codes
ResultCode	ResultDesc	Explanation
0	The service request is processed successfully	Request processed successfully on M-PESA.
R000002	The OriginalTransactionID is invalid	The TransactionID provided is invalid or does not exist on M-PESA.
R000001	The transaction has already been reversed	The TransactionID provided is already reversed.
11	The DebitParty is in an invalid state	The organization/short code account is not active.
21	The initiator is not allowed to initiate	API user lacks Org Reversals Initiator API role.
2001	The initiator information is invalid	API user credentials are invalid.
2006	Declined due to account rule	Organization/short code account is not active.
2028	Not permitted according to product assignment	Short code has no permission to perform the request.
8006	The security credential is locked	API user password is locked.
1	The balance is insufficient	Short code does not have enough money to complete the request.
Error Codes
Example
{
  "requestId": "94fc-460e-a970-797968bf6a851272619",
  "errorCode": "400.002.02",
  "errorMessage": "Bad Request - Invalid TransactionID"
}
Parameter	Description	Sample Value	Type
requestId	Unique identifier assigned by API	30764-19833054-1	String
errorCode	Unique error code	400.002.02	String
errorMessage	Descriptive message of failure	Bad Request - Invalid TransactionID	String
Error Response Codes
errorCode	errorMessage	Mitigation	HTTP code
404.001.03	Invalid Access Token	Regenerate a new access token and use it before expiry.	404
400.002.02	Bad Request – Invalid XXXX	Ensure the request payload is set as per API documentation.	400
404.001.01	Resource not found	Make sure you are calling the correct API endpoint.	404
500.001.1001	Internal Server Error	Ensure the request payload is set as per API documentation.	500
500.003.02	Spike Arrest Violation	Avoid sending multiple requests that violate API TPS limit.	500
500.003.03	Quota Violation	Avoid sending multiple requests that violate API requests limit.	500

## Transaction Status

/mpesa/transactionstatus/v1/query

Request Body
{
  "Initiator": "testapiuser",
  "SecurityCredential": "ClONZiMYBpc65lmpJ7nvnrDmUe0WvHvA5QbOsPjEo92B6IGFwDdvdeJIFL0kgwsEKWu6SQKG4ZZUxjC",
  "CommandID": "TransactionStatusQuery",
  "TransactionID": "NEF61H8J60",
  "OriginalConversationID": "7071-4170-a0e5-8345632bad442144258",
  "PartyA": "600782",
  "IdentifierType": "4",
  "ResultURL": "http://myservice:8080/transactionstatus/result",
  "QueueTimeOutURL": "http://myservice:8080/timeout",
  "Remarks": "OK",
  "Occasion": "OK"
}
Request Parameter Definition
Name	Description	Type	Sample Values
CommandID	Takes only the 'TransactionStatusQuery' Command ID.	String	TransactionStatusQuery
PartyA	Organization/MSISDN receiving the transaction	Numeric	Short code (6-9 digits) MSISDN (12 Digits)
IdentifierType	Type of organization receiving the transaction	Numeric	4 – Organization shortcode
Remarks	Comments that are sent along with the transaction	String	A sequence of characters up to 100
Initiator	The name of the initiator initiating the request.	Alpha-Numeric	This is the credential/username used to authenticate the transaction request
SecurityCredential	Encrypted credential of the user getting transaction status	String	Encrypted password for the initiator to authenticate the transaction request
QueueTimeoutURL	The path that stores information of timeout transaction	URL	https://ip:port or domain: port/path
TransactionID	Unique identifier to identify a transaction on Mpesa. Also known as the Mpesa Receipt Number.	Alpha-Numeric	LXXXXXX1234
ResultURL	The path that stores information of a transaction.	URL	https://ip:port/path or domain:port/path
Occasion	Optional parameter	String	A sequence of characters up to 100
OriginalConversationID	This is the Originator Conversation ID of the transaction whose status is being checked.	String	7071-4170-a0e5-8345632bad442144258
Response Body
{
  "OriginatorConversationID": "1236-7134259-1",
  "ConversationID": "AG_20210709_1234409f86436c583e3f",
  "ResponseCode": "0",
  "ResponseDescription": "Accept the service request successfully."
}
Response Parameter Definition
Name	Description	Parameter Type	Sample Value
OriginatorConversationID	The unique request ID for tracking a transaction	Alpha-Numeric	Alpha-Numeric String of less than 20 characters e.g.: 1236-7134259-1
ConversationID	The unique request ID returned my M-PESA for each request made	Alpha-Numeric	Alpha Numeric String of less than 20 characters e.g.: AG_20210709_1234409f86436c583e3f
ResponseCode	The numeric status code indicates the status transaction processing. 0 means success and any other code means an error occurred or the transaction failed.	Number	0 or 1 or 2001 or 21
ResponseDescription	Response description message	String	Accept the service request successfully
Callback payload

{
  "Result": {
    "ConversationID": "AG_20180223_0000493344ae97d86f75",
    "OriginatorConversationID": "3213-416199-2",
    "ReferenceData": {
      "ReferenceItem": {
        "Key": "Occasion"
      }
    },
    "ResultCode": 0,
    "ResultDesc": "The service request is processed successfully.",
    "ResultParameters": {
      "ResultParameter": [
        {
          "Key": "DebitPartyName",
          "Value": "600310 - Safaricom333"
        },
        {
          "Key": "DebitPartyName",
          "Value": "254708374149 - John Doe"
        },
        {
          "Key": "OriginatorConversationID",
          "Value": "3211-416020-3"
        },
        {
          "Key": "InitiatedTime",
          "Value": "20180223054112"
        },
        {
          "Key": "DebitAccountType",
          "Value": "Utility Account"
        },
        {
          "Key": "DebitPartyCharges",
          "Value": "Fee For B2C Payment|KES|22.40"
        },
        {
          "Key": "TransactionReason"
        },
        {
          "Key": "ReasonType",
          "Value": "Business Payment to Customer via API"
        },
        {
          "Key": "TransactionStatus",
          "Value": "Completed"
        },
        {
          "Key": "FinalisedTime",
          "Value": "20180223054112"
        },
        {
          "Key": "Amount",
          "Value": "300"
        },
        {
          "Key": "ConversationID",
          "Value": "AG_20180223_000041b09c22e613d6c9"
        },
        {
          "Key": "ReceiptNo",
          "Value": "MBN31H462N"
        }
      ]
    },
    "ResultType": 0,
    "TransactionID": "MBN0000000"
  }
}
Results Parameter Definition

Name	Description	Type	Sample Values
ConversationID	The unique identifier generated by M-PESA for a request.	String	AG_20180223_0000493344ae97d86f75
OriginatorConversationID	The unique identifier of the request message. This is auto-generated by M-PESA for third-party/Organizations. Its value comes from the response message. It can be used to check the status of the transaction.	String	3213-416199-2
ReferenceData	It is used to carry some reference data that M-PESA need not analyse but need to record into the transaction log.	ReferenceData	n/a
ReferenceItem	It is used to carry some reference data that MM needs not analyse but needs to record in the transaction log.	ParameterType	n/a
ResultCode	It indicates whether M-PESA processes the request successfully or not. The max length is 10.	String	0
ResultDesc	Its value is a description of the parameter Result Code. The max length is 1024.	String	The service request is processed successfully.
ResultParameters	It is used to carry specific parameters for reversals API.	n/a	n/a
Key	It indicates a parameter name.	String	DebitPartyName
Value	It indicates a parameter value.	String	600310 - Safaricom333
ResultType	0: completed 1: waiting for further messages.	Integer	0
TransactionID	It’s only for transactions. When the request is a transaction request, M-PESA will generate a unique identifier for the transaction.	String	MBN0000000
Error Codes
Error	Possible Cause	Mitigation
500.003.1001 Internal Server Error	Server failure	Make sure everything on your side is correctly set up as per the API and you are calling the correct endpoints plus your server is running as expected
400.003.01 Invalid Access Token	Might be using a wrong or expired access token	Regenerate a new token and use it before expiry, if you are copy-pasting manually make sure you’ve pasted the correct access token.
400.003.02 Bad Request	The server cannot process the request because something is missing	Make sure everything on your side is correctly set up as per the API documentation.
500.003.03 Error Occurred: Quota Violation	You are sending multiple requests that violate M-PESA transaction per second speed	For testing, send a reasonable number of requests if possible one request at a time.
500.003.02 Error Occurred: Spike Arrest Violation	Your endpoints constantly generate a lot of errors that lead to a spike that affects our M-PESA performance	Make sure your endpoints/server is running and responding as expected by M-PESA and accessible over the internet.
404.003.01 Resource not found	The requested resource could not be found but may be available in the future. Subsequent requests by the client are permissible.	Make sure you are calling the correct M-PESA API endpoint.
404.001.04 Invalid Authentication Header	All M-PESA APIs on the Daraja platform are POST except Authorization API which is GET. If you’ve possibly misplaced the headers, you will get the error.	All M-PESA API requests on the Daraja platform are POST requests except Authorization API which is a GET request.
400.002.05 Invalid Request Payload	Your request body is not properly drafted	Make sure you are submitting the correct request payload as shown in the sample request body for all the APIs, avoid typo errors.
Response codes
Response Code	Response Description
0	Success
Result codes
Result code	Result Description
0	Success
SFC_IC0003	The operator does not exist.

## Pull Transactions

This is a reconciliation API that allows a partner to query all transactions performed under their shortcode for C2B.

/pulltransactions/v1/register

Register Pull
To use the Pull API, a user must register their short code by calling the Register Pull endpoint. The short code must belong to a user who is live and operating in the production environment.
Note: The Pull API registration is a one-time process required to enable transaction pulling.

Headers

Key	Value
Content-Type	application/json
Accept-Encoding	application/json
Authorization	Bearer access_token
Request Body
{
  "ShortCode": "600000",
  "RequestType": "Pull",
  "NominatedNumber": "0722000000",
  "CallBackURL": "https://domain/path"
}
Request Parameter Definition
Name	Description	Parameter Type	Sample Values
ShortCode	Organization ShortCode that was used during Go- Live process.	Numeric	17831
RequestType	Defines the type of operation, default value is Pull	String	Pull
NominatedNumber	This is Safaricom MSISDN associated with the organization account using Pull	String	254722000000
CallBackURL	A CallBack URL is a valid secure URL.	String	https://mydomain.com/confirmation
Response Body
{
  "ResponseRefID": "feb5e3f2-fbc-4745-844c-ee37b546f627",
  "ResponseStatus": "1000",
  "ShortCode": "600000",
  "ResponseDescription": "Shortcode Registered Successfully"
}
Response Parameter Definition
Name	Description	Parameter Type	Sample Values
ResponseRefID	This is a global unique Identifier of the request	String	92713e02-970c-47ac-93f8-409058f2c58d
Response Status	This is the status code of the request.	Numeric	1000
ShortCode	Organization ShortCode	String	600638
Response Description	This is the status of the request.	String	Shortcode Registered Successfully
Response Codes
Code	Description
1000	Short code Registered Successfully
1001	ShortCode already Registered
Query Pull Transaction
Headers

Key	Value
Content-Type	application/json
Authorization	Bearer access_token
Request Body
{
  "ShortCode": "600000",
  "StartDate": "2020-08-04 8:36:00",
  "EndDate": "2020-08-16 10:10:000",
  "OffSetValue": "0"
}
Request Parameter Definition
Name	Description	Parameter Type	Sample Values
ShortCode	This is your paybill number/till number, which you expect to receive payments notifications about.	Numeric	17843
StartDate	The start period of the missing transactions in the format of YYYY-07-31 20:35:21 / 2019-07-31 19:00	String	2019-07-31 20:35:21 / 2019-07-31 19:00
EndDate	The end of the period for the missing transactions in the format of 2019-07-31 20:35:21 / 2019-07-31 22:35	String	2019-07-31 20:35:21 / 2019-07-31 22:35
OffSetValue	Starts from 0. The service uses offset as opposed to page numbers. The OFF- SET value allows you to specify which row to start from retrieving data. Suppose you wanted to show results 101-200. With the OFFSET keyword you type the (page number/index/offset value) 100.	Numeric	type the (page number/index/offset value) 100.
Response Body
{
  "ResponseRefID": "26178-42530161-2",
  "ResponseCode": "1000",
  "ResponseMessage": "Success",
  "Response": [
    [
      {
        "transactionId": "yzlyrEsRG1",
        "trxDate": "2020-08-05T10:13:00Z",
        "msisdn": 722000000,
        "sender": "UAT2",
        "transactiontype": "c2b-pay-bill-debit",
        "billreference": "37207636392",
        "amount": "168.00",
        "organizationname": "Daraja Pull API Test"
      }
    ]
  ]
}
Response Parameter Definition
Name	Description	Parameter Type	Sample Value
ResponseRefID	This is a global unique Identifier of the request	String	92713e02-970c-47ac-93f8-409058f2c58d
ResponseCode	This is a numeric status code that indicates the status of the transaction processing. 0 means successful processing and any other code means an error occurred or the transaction failed	String	1000
ResponseMessage	The response description is a message from the API that gives the status of the request processing. It usually maps to a specific ResponseCode value. It can be a Success processing message or an error description message	String	Success
transactionId	This is the unique M-PESA transaction ID.	String	LHG31AA5TX
trxDate	This is a timestamp that represents the date and time that the transaction was completed	String	2020-08-05T10:13:00Z
msisdn	This is the number of the customer who made the payment.	Numeric	72200000
transactiontype	The Type of the transaction made by the customer	String	c2b-pay-bill-debit
billreference	This is the account number for which the customer is making the payment. This is only applicable to Customer PayBill Transactions	String	An alpha-numeric value of up to 20 characters.
amount	This is the Amount that was transacted	Decimal	233.8
organizationname	The name of your Organization used on go-live	String	Daraja Pull API Test
Response Codes
Code	Description
1000	Success, transactions fetched successfully
1001	• Null, No transactions available for the selected time period. • The response body is "Transaction": "[[]]"
Error Codes
Code	Description
400.001	Invalid ShortCode
401.001	Invalid Access Token
500	Failed to retrieve transactions. The short code does not have any available transactions.